This video does one thing. It helps you
understand AI before chat GPT5 comes
along and changes everything all over
again. I get so many DMs that say,
"Nate, how do I actually understand AI
before it's too late? Nate, I am late on
AI. Nate, I don't know how to catch up."
This video is for you. It's for anyone
who has that feeling. It's also for you
if you want to know what's in the box on
Chad GPT5 and what we know so far. Let's
start with this moment we're in today.
This is the summer of consolidation. I'm
comparing it to the 2007 iPhone release.
Fundamentally, what is going to happen
from here until October, November,
December of 2025 is going to make 2023
and 2024 models look completely
outdated. AI itself is going through a
platform shift right now. And chat GPT5
is one of the big releases that we are
looking forward to this year that is
going to underscore that fundamental
shift toward a more unified professional
enterprise experience. And if you want
to take advantage of that, if you want
to be ready for that, it makes sense to
get ready now. It makes sense to catch
up now so you don't feel farther behind.
So what we're going to cover is
everything we know about Chad GPT5.
We're going to talk about the story of
AI very briefly in plain English. You
don't have to have a maths degree. We're
going to talk about some resources you
can use to dig into. Yes, they are on
YouTube. And we're going to talk about
people to follow to keep up with the
signal over all the noise that's going
to happen this summer because there's a
lot of noise. That's a ton to cover, but
we're going to do it fast. First release
timeline. We think July, early Q3 could
be any time. We do know that the Open AI
team is off this coming week through
about July 4th. They've been working
very hard. it would make sense to give
them a break before the pressure of the
roll out. Part of the pressure has to do
with bringing the model into a single
truly unified brain quote unquote. So
bringing the Oer reasoning model, the
general knowledge of GPT4 voice
capabilities and deep searching tools
all into one place. As Sam has said, we
hate the model picker as much as you do.
Getting that right is really hard. We
will see if he gets it right, but that's
certainly what they're going for with
Jet GPT5. As far as capabilities, look
for four areas of improvement. We don't
know the exact specs, but I kind of
don't care about the exact specs because
typically you have to actually use the
models to see if they're any good.
Improvement area number one,
multimodality, seamless speech in and
out, images, maybe video with this
release. Reasoning depth to go
seamlessly from limited chain of thought
to really reliable in-depth problem
solving reliability. surfacing that one
good answer in 10,000 consistently. And
that, by the way, takes a lot of
inference under the surface to pick the
right answer. And then fourth,
personalization, memory, access to
email, calendar, enterprise knowledge,
etc. This will take adaptive computing,
so heavy GPU use only when needed. And I
think it's going to lean pretty heavily
into voice because that would align
nicely with the very rumored Johnny Ive
device. So, we will see. However, even
if it's adaptive compute, it's still
going to take a lot of compute cores.
It's going to take perhaps tens of
thousands of GPUs to properly serve this
model. It has to be scaled out. And that
is not something that they are going to
do without being sure they got it right.
Because if you recall, every time we've
had an OpenAI at launch in the past year
or so, we've had a brown out beforehand.
We've often had scaling issues during
the launch. This is their premier launch
for the year 2025. They do not want to
mess it up. So, they're going to take
their time and make sure they get the
engineering right. And that's part of
why we don't have a date and they
haven't announced a date. Okay. So, the
takeaways for builders now based on what
we know. Expect smoother user
experience, not just bigger brains.
Expect a gradual roll out because again,
they're going to be monitoring those
GPUs. So, I would expect it's going to
follow their usual pattern and go from
pro to plus to free, but they're going
to try and accelerate it as fast as they
can. I would bet because they really
want this to be a flagship roll out for
everybody. And so even if you get less
stuff or less intelligence or whatever
chat GPT5 light, it's still going to get
to free pretty quick, I think. Expect
expect extra tooling for monitoring
alignment. I think that's going to be a
bigger factor. I don't know what that
will look like. It's just a guess, but I
would expect more levers in the APIs in
particular for monitoring alignment. I
will be curious to see what the actual
parameters look like just like everybody
else. But mostly I want to see if they
actually are able to build a single
coherent brain that can infer from our
prompts what the model needs to do.
Whether it's a deep research task or
something that's much lighter. Okay,
that is what we know on chat GPT5. Part
two, helping you get ready for Chat
GPT5. What is AI anyway? Yes, we're
going to go there and it's going to be
plain English. We're going to start back
in the early 2000s, classical machine
learning. Machine learning is
fundamentally telling an algorithm what
details matter. One example that came up
in the 2000s was spam filtering. You
would count exclamation marks in emails.
You would look for a keyword match with
Viagra. You would manually encode those
features and then you would use logistic
regression, decision trees, etc. And you
would try and get the algorithm to help
you filter out the spam. In 2012, things
started to shift. GPUs became cheaper.
We started to get very large labeled
data sets like imageet and we had deeper
neural networks that actually learned
features automatically. We got a
computer vision breakthrough because we
had more compute. So we discovered that
edges and textures could be determined
without being told in advanced. We
discovered with word tovec in 2013 that
networks could learn word relationships.
The famous example is that a network
could learn that king minus man plus
woman equals queen. For the first time,
meaning could emerge from data, not
rules. And that unlocked a lot of other
interesting discoveries. However, we
were still limited. Fundamentally, we
were limited by sequential processing.
Everything had to be read one token at a
time. Training was slow. These models
struggled with long sentences and were
generally only interesting to academics.
they didn't really hit production for
most use cases in the enterprise. Then
everything changed in 2017 when the
transformer revolution happened. It was
started by the paper attention is all
you need, which is super famous. I
definitely recommend you go check it
out. It included the insight that you
could use attention weights to show
token relationships and that unlocked
massive GPU scaling. For the first time,
you can track long range dependencies
across human language. And it turns out
that human language has a lot of
longrange dependencies. As an example,
you know in your heads, if you're still
watching this, that I have been talking
about the leadup to chat GPT5, even
though I haven't mentioned that in a few
paragraphs now. Why is that? Why is
that? Because you're human and you can
understand long-range dependencies.
Until 2017, machines couldn't do that.
Okay, so two big macro trends that
emerged. One, self-supervised learning.
No handlabeling was needed anymore. You
could train it to fill in the blanks and
predict the next token and you could
scale. You could scale from millions to
billions to trillions of tokens. That
led to scaling laws. It turned out that
performance improves in a predictable
way with scale. And if bigger is
reliably and quantifiably better, it
makes sense to invest. There is yield
there. That unlocked a massive
investment in AI over the last six or
seven years. So that's the brief story.
Now we fast forward past 2017, past 2020
up to 2025. How does AI actually work?
By the way, this will work for Chat
GPT5's basic architecture just like any
other large language model. It is
important to understand how they work.
Number one, prediction. Just predicting
the next word sounds really trivial, but
it's not. Fundamentally, if you have
scale and if you understand the
structure of language, you can encode a
vast amount of knowledge. You can build
up answers token by token that reflect
that structure that reflect that scale
and you can use model weights which are
conditional probabilities and they can
encode a tremendously dense information
set. They can encode long range
relationships. They can encode short
range relationships. They can talk about
grammatical similarities. They can talk
about cognates or meaning similarities.
They can encode even relationships we
don't fully understand. One of the most
interesting things about LLMs and
weights and encoding is that we have
learned more things about language than
we expected because LLMs are better in
some ways at learning natural language
than we are ourselves. The people who
invented it. So let's talk about these
weights. So we call them embeddings.
Computers need to work with numbers. So
we have to turn the words into numbers.
Text is broken into tokens which are
really subwords of about four
characters. Each token is then encoded
as a highdimensional vector which means
that it's a fancy number set that
captures meaning in a spatial way. So
embeddings will discover that cat is
close to kitten because the vectorred
numbers are going to be somewhat similar
but it will be far away from democracy
unless a cat runs for president. You
never know. All of this is learned
during training and it enables you to
conduct mathematical operations on
meaning itself on semantic meaning which
is really cool. Number two, I told you
this would be interesting. Number two,
the transformer engine. Every token
computes relevance to all other tokens.
That's really key. Query vectors are
going to measure similarity between
different keys, create a weighted
average of values, and different
attention heads are going to find
different patterns. What all of that
adds up to is different perspectives on
the pattern making in text
mathematically. And that adds nonlinear
depth. So you can stack different layers
of heads up to 60 plus and get a very
complex capture of dependencies which is
a fancy technical way of saying a
complex highfidelity picture of a human
text. You can understand the meanings
inside it which is why if you ask an AI
to read a text and give you a sense of
the literary meanings this is why it
understands it. transformer architecture
is why opus 4 can understand Hemingway
it's wild but it's actually math I don't
know that Hemingway would agree or
support or encourage it but it's
actually math it is position aware so
word order does matter and we see that
when we prompt getting to training so
this is all just understanding how they
work you have to train these models the
goal is to minimize the error in
prediction for the next token but it
turns out it is difficult to do that
well and the reason it's difficult ult
to do that well is because words can
have different meanings and goals in
different contexts. And so you have to
have a lot of data sources from a really
wide range. Web pages, books,
newspapers, code, dialogue transcripts,
highquality data sets, sometimes
lowquality data sets, certainly getting
started lowquality data sets. Now we're
getting to real scale. Trillions of
tokens, thousands of GPUs, weeks and
weeks and weeks and weeks of training on
this massive, massive data set. And yes,
they do try and make it as high quality
as they can. now because they know that
affects the model. And what you're doing
is you're doing something called
gradient descent, which is basically
trying to systematically minimize the
model's propensity to error on the next
token prediction across billions and
trillions of it takes a long time. It's
very complex to rig up and it gets
exponentially harder the bigger the
model gets. And guess what? The models
get bigger. This is part of why llama 4
behemoth has not been released. The
training run did not go well. Or so the
rumor has it. Zuck, don't come for me.
Weights encode language patterns, facts,
and reasoning, and they do it better
when the training goes well. One of the
reasons it is rumored that Sonnet 4 is
good at writing, good at code is because
Enthropic took time to get the training
data right for the sonnet model. And
also for Opus, it's interrelated.
There's like a focus on training data
that comes through for Claude. And that
is rumored to be one of the reasons why
Claude's personality, quote unquote, or
Claude's pros, Claude's code is supposed
to be very good. I certainly find it
that way. And I'm not the only one. This
is not an advertisement for Claude. I
love lots of models. All right. Uh
inference. Inference is what happens
after training is complete, after launch
day, when you get to generating
responses. And yes, all of this is still
roughly speaking how GPT5 will work.
There will be some wrinkles as it is
working across multiple context lengths
and token lengths and or multiple
context lengths to infer meaning but
fundamentally the same bones will be
there and I'm giving you the bones so
you understand them. This is a one-stop
shop so you can understand how AI works.
Inference you want to take a query that
you give and you want to get a good
answer back. So you have to tokenize the
prompt and you have to turn it into
embeddings. We know what embeddings are
now. You have to run it through the
transformer which is going to figure out
the contextual vectors that go with that
prompt. Then you have to score it and
you have to figure out the sampling
strategies from all of the possible
futures or all the possible tokens it
could predict that you want. You could
have a greedy strategy which just uses
the highest probability token. You have
temperature controls to control the
randomness. You can even do something
like beam search for parallel pathing.
Anyway, you figure out your strategy to
sample. This is just for one token. You
add the token and you do it all over
again and you repeat until you stop.
Coherence emerges from doing that a lot
and giving lots of feedback which gets
to step five. How do you align these
things? Step five is when you take raw
models which mimic everything including
really dark content and you give them
very structured alignment. You give them
reinforcement learning including
learning with human feedback where
humans rank answers. You give them
system prompts and you give them curated
question and answer to teach them
formats. The goal is that they come back
with honest and harmless and helpful
responses. This is not an easy area to
solve for. Even now, we are figuring out
holes that we have in our responses and
how to close them. The grandma hack
still works. You can still tell most
models that your grandma is unwell or
has passed away and the model will do
something it's not supposed to do out of
sympathy for you and your grandma.
Which, by the way, I I don't think I'm
spreading much there. I think that's a
very well-known hack, but it still works
and that's an area of alignment. All
right, where are we going after this?
What are things that we would expect
chat GPT5 to be able to do? Retrieval
log meta generation is something that
has become big. Uh it's fundamentally
where a model will call a database to
get fresh facts. It's like an open book
exam. This can reduce hallucinations if
you construct it well. It can also
constrain the model if you put a rag on
in a way that forces the model to only
look at that data and that keeps the
model from thinking outside of that
space in a way that is unhelpful because
it turns out you need more data than
that. So I have seen rag architectures
that are tremendously useful because the
model can go and get the data and come
back and also think more broadly. And
I've also seen rag architectures that
kind of feel like a dead end because you
go in and you get the answers out of the
HR policy manual and it's like that's
all we got and there's not really much
to it and nobody uses it. So rag is one
of those ones you have to like actually
use carefully. Second big one that you
want to expect chat GPD J say that five
times fast. Chat GPT5 to go after tool
use. There will be a lot of tool use in
chat GPT5. So output JSON triggering
calculators databases agents extending
beyond the static text. We already see
this with 03. I expect more of it.
Mixture of experts is quite
controversial. I don't know if they'll
talk about it, but fundamentally there's
a sense in which models will sometimes
call special expert submodels and the
router will choose where to activate
them which can lead to efficient
scaling. That might be under the
surface. They may not tell us and
frankly they may not tell us if they're
using a rag model. They are using
something to keep context windows
rolling. They aren't talking a ton
about. And so they're also using
something with memory. One of the
interesting things with OpenAI as a team
is they're not super transparent so far
with how they do some of these things.
That may change because they're also
rumored to be introducing an open-source
model in July along with Chad GPT5. We
will see. Time will tell. This brings me
to the current limitations. Yes,
transparency is a question.
Hallucinations are definitely something
that are a concern. You know, Sam Alman
had admitted on stage recently that they
are figuring out that hallucinations
work differently with reasoning models
than with non-reasoning models and that
that is leading to questions for them
and they're wrestling with how to align
that better. I think that's a very
perceptive approach because to me like I
feel like hallucination type really
changes. If you have a simpler model,
it's just going to be a domain
completeness error. It's going to be
like, well, this is just wrong. If you
have a more complex model, the
hallucination, quote unquote, may
actually be a complete thought that's
very coherent, that's scaffolded out
correctly, and the error may be that the
reality isn't as scaffolded out and
complete as you think. So, I will be
curious how chat GPG5 addresses
hallucinations, how it addresses bias
from training data, how it addresses
multi-step reasoning and working off of
memory. There's going to be a lot of
things to learn from. Okay, we have gone
through Chad GPT5 and what to expect, a
little bit about AI, how AI works. Now I
want to give you the cheat sheet on what
you can keep learning. Number one, I
want you to start to look through the
introduction to large language models
that Andre Karpathy talks about and
gives on his channel. It is an
absolutely phenomenal introduction to
large language models in AI. Neural
network series by three blue one brown
also on YouTube also extraordinary. And
the Stanford CS say that five times
fast. Also an incredible 16 lecture
course. If you just do those three, you
are already going to be farther ahead
than 98% of people really. There's a few
others that I could get into, but for
the sake of time, we'll jump jump a
little bit forward. I now want to give
you the 11 people that I think will give
you the most signal versus noise that I
can find anywhere on the internet for
AI. Number one, probably haven't heard
of him, Simon Willis. He co-created
Django, the language. He coined the term
prompt injection. He writes phenomenal
blog posts and he has a ton of them,
like over 1300. He's built LLM command
line tools and he's absolutely an
authoritative resource. Ethan Mullik is
number two. He is tremendously
influential on AI. He wrote a book on
it. He's a Wharton professor and he has
been tremendously clear about describing
the impact of AI on both academia and
work. I've mentioned Andre Carpathy,
former Tesla AI director, Open AI
co-founder. He has done a phenomenal job
on teaching AI and that is why I
recommended some of his courses. He is
able to take a complex concept and
distill it into something simple and
understandable in a way that I just
rarely see anywhere else. Okay, let's
follow a few others. Four and five I
think you're not going to be surprised
by. Number four is Sam Alman, OpenAI
CEO. I think enough said. Number five is
Daario Amade, Anthropic CEO. Again,
enough said. Deise Hosabis is slightly
less wellknown unless you're deeper in
the space. He did win the Nobel Prize in
2024. Uh and he did so for his uh alpha
fold work in chemistry. Fundamentally he
is one of the leading minds on AI and
he's especially deep uh working with
Google on the science side of things.
Leotsk is uh another former founder of
open AI. He's now founded safe super
intelligence uh and he is pursuing super
intelligence directly. He's not doing
product releases. You won't see him at a
dev day, anything like that. All he's
doing is focusing on super intelligence.
Okay. Number nine, Clairvo. She has done
a phenomenal job talking about how
people actually AI. She's built a
product called Chat PRD and she is one
of the leading lights on how you apply
AI in the workplace. Number 10,
Dwarvesh. Uh he's become I I guess
Silicon Valley's favorite podcaster. Uh
he interviews really well. He's deeply
read. He's deeply thoughtful. mostly you
follow his podcast because the people he
picks are interesting and he has very
long and interesting conversations with
them. Mary Mer, I talked about her
recently on this channel. She is
phenomenal in the sort of deep trends
investor level space. I covered her 340
page AI trends report. She is someone
who's been investing in internet and
investing in tech for decades and she is
renowned for her sharpness. Oh, I just
Those are the 11, right? Those are the
11 to follow. Let's wrap this up. What
do you now know that most people don't?
One, you know that GPT5 isn't just GPT4,
but bigger. That by itself is a big
piece of knowledge. Two, you can tell me
and everyone else the quick journey from
spam filters to chat GPT. I just told it
to you. You can go back and rewatch it
if you need to. Number three, you know
that LLMs are sophisticated pattern
recognizers. You actually have clear
English that I just described to you
that explains how they work. It's not
magic. you know where to go learn from
AI. I gave you some courses and you know
who to follow this for signal over
noise. I want you to realize that AI
isn't about keeping up with every
Twitter thread. It's about having a
solid foundation. It's about knowing
where to look, having the right mental
models and the right guides that will
set you up for this iPhone moment in
2025. We are replatforming AI. It's not
just chat GPT5, by the way. I would
expect a lot of other significant
replatforming moves from Google, from
Anthropic, from potentially from Grock,
from Deepseek. Model makers are in a
race to the finish line. Meta is going
to get in there at some point and they
are all trying to get to this moment of
establishing a platform. They all know
that LLMs by themselves are yesterday's
news. They need to get to powerful
models that ship compelling enterprise
user interfaces, compelling experiences
for consumers. That is the story. That
is the iPhone moment story for 2025. And
I want you to understand what drives it
all. Good luck out there.